
= twofish.rb

Author:: Martin Carpenter
Email:: mcarpenter@free.fr
Copyright:: Copyright (c) Martin Carpenter 2009

This class implements the Twofish symmetric encryption algorithm
in pure Ruby. The original paper describing the cipher "Twofish:
A 128-Bit Block Cipher" (Schneier, Kelsey, Whiting, Wagner, Hall,
Ferguson) and further information on Twofish can be found at
http://www.schneier.com/twofish.html.

This implementation is derived with kind permission
from Guido Flohr's "pure Perl" module Crypt-Twofish_PP:
http://search.cpan.org/~guido/Crypt-Twofish_PP-0.17.  The overall
structure and a good number of the comments from that implementation
have been retained.


=== Example

ECB mode:

    require 'twofish'

    key = '1234567890123456'
    tf = Twofish.new(key, :padding => :zero_byte)
    ciphertext = tf.encrypt('Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet')

CBC mode with manually specified initialization vector (may alternatively
be specified in constructor options hash):

    require 'twofish'

    key = '1234567890123456'
    tf = Twofish.new(key, :mode => :cbc, :padding => :zero_byte)
    tf.iv = 'abcdefghijklmnop'
    ciphertext = tf.encrypt('Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet')


=== Unit tests

test_twofish.rb defines the unit tests. The iterative test vectors
from the original paper are used (although only the final result is
checked). The CBC mode test vectors were checked using the BouncyCastle
implementation with JRuby as follows:


    include Java

    require 'bcprov-jdk16-145.jar'

    include_class Java::org.bouncycastle.jce.provider.BouncyCastleProvider
    include_class Java::org.bouncycastle.crypto.modes.CBCBlockCipher
    include_class Java::org.bouncycastle.crypto.engines.TwofishEngine
    include_class Java::org.bouncycastle.crypto.params.KeyParameter
    include_class Java::org.bouncycastle.crypto.params.ParametersWithIV

    plaintext = ("\0"*32).to_java_bytes
    ciphertext = ("\0"*32).to_java_bytes
    key = ("\0"*16).to_java_bytes
    iv = ("\0"*16).to_java_bytes
    key_parameter = KeyParameter.new(key)
    cipher_parameter = ParametersWithIV.new(key_parameter, iv)
    cipher = CBCBlockCipher.new TwofishEngine.new
    cipher.init(true, cipher_parameter) # true == encrypt

    len = 0
    while len < plaintext.length
      len += cipher.processBlock(plaintext, len, ciphertext, len)
    end

    puts ciphertext.to_a.pack('c*').unpack('H*')

The original block test vectors are available as a
machine-readable file from http://www.schneier.com/code/ecb_ival.txt

To run the unit tests, type:

    rake test


=== Documentation

Aside from this README, rdoc documentation may be built as follows:

    rake rdoc

The documentation will be built in the rdoc subdirectory.


=== Benchmark

A simple benchmark can be found in test/benchmark.rb and can be run
thusly:

    rake benchmark

Ruby 1.9 is approximately three times faster than ruby 1.8.7
(Ubuntu x86-64).


=== Bugs, omissions and weaknesses

Encryption and decryption are (not unexpectedly) slow. If you need a
faster implementation for Ruby then the BouncyCastle provider
(http://www.bouncycastle.org) plays well with JRuby (http://www.jruby.org).
See above ("Unit tests") for a sample script.

Ruby >=1.9 introduces string encodings. The current workaround uses
#ord and #chr but this is not very satisfactory: it would be preferable
to move to byte arrays throughout.

The only padding mechanisms implemented are "none" (don't pad) and "zero
byte" (append zero bytes to make up a full block). Zero byte padding has
a well-known failure mode: if the plaintext terminates in null bytes
then these may be erroneously removed when un-padding is performed.

Possible implementation-dependent timing attacks (Bignum promotion,
#pack(), ...).

If no initialization vector is provided for CBC mode then the system
random number generator (Kernel#rand) is used to generate one. The system
random number generator may be weaker than desired.

The IV is not silently prepended to the ciphertext since if
the resulting ciphertext is transmitted as is this can introduce
a weakness. IV should ideally be transmitted OOB. There
is a good explanation of this risk at Terry Ritter's page
http://www.ciphersbyritter.com/GLOSSARY.HTM#CipherBlockChaining

   if the IV is not enciphered, and if the opponents
   can intercept and change the IV in transit, they can
   change the first-block plaintext bit-for-bit, without
   a block-wide garble. That means an opponent could make
   systematic changes to the first block plaintext simply
   by changing the IV.

